Extending the glossary (#7732)
pydata/xarray: doc/user-guide/terminology.rst

        ``__array_ufunc__`` and ``__array_function__`` protocols are also required.

        __ https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0022-ndarray-duck-typing-overview.html

.. ipython:: python
    :suppress:

    import xarray as xr
    import numpy as np

Aligning
    Aligning refers to the process of ensuring that two or more DataArrays or Datasets
    have the same dimensions and coordinates, so that they can be combined or compared properly.

.. ipython:: python

    # Two DataArrays with different time coordinates
    time1 = np.arange("2022-01-01", "2022-01-06", dtype="datetime64")
    time2 = np.arange("2022-01-03", "2022-01-08", dtype="datetime64")

    # Two DataArrays of random temperature values, each with time as a coordinate

>     temp1 = xr.DataArray(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    d1 = xr.DataArray(
```
temp is not a good name, maybe something as simple as d, or da.

    arrays to a common shape before the operation is applied.

.. ipython:: python

    a = xr.DataArray(np.array([1, 2, 3]), dims=["x"])
    b = xr.DataArray(np.array([4, 5, 6, 7]), dims=["y"])
    result = a + b
    print(result)

In this example, 'a' has shape (3,) and 'b' has shape (4,).
If we try to add these two arrays, xarray will automatically broadcast the arrays to a common shape before performing
the addition. It will extend 'a' along the new 'y' dimension and extend 'b' along the new 'x' dimension so that both
arrays have shape (3, 4).
The result is a 2D array with shape (3, 4) where each element is the sum of the corresponding elements
in 'a' and 'b'. Note that xarray has also automatically added coordinates for the new dimensions 'x' and 'y'.

**In xarray, "merging", "concatenating", and "combining" are all operations used to combine two or more DataArrays or
Datasets into a single** ``DataArray`` **or** ``Dataset``. **However, each of these operations has a slightly different meaning and
purpose.**

Merging
    Merging is used to combine two or more Datasets or DataArrays that have different variables or coordinates along

>     the same dimensions. When merging, xarray aligns the variables and coordinates of the different datasets along

Reviewer: There is no requirement for the different arrays to have the same dimensions.

>     the specified dimensions and creates a new ``Dataset`` containing all the variables and coordinates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the specified dimensions and creates a new and consistent ``Dataset`` containing all the variables and coordinates.
```

.. ipython:: python

    # create two 1D arrays with names
    arr1 = xr.DataArray([1, 2, 3], dims=["x"], coords={"x": [10, 20, 30]}, name="arr1")
    arr2 = xr.DataArray([4, 5, 6], dims=["x"], coords={"x": [20, 30, 40]}, name="arr2")

    # merge the two arrays into a new dataset

>     merged_ds = xr.Dataset({"arr1": arr1, "arr2": arr2})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    merged_ds = xr.merge([arr1, arr2])
```

    # print the merged dataset
    print(merged_ds)

Both arrays 'arr1' and 'arr2' have one dimension 'x', which has three coordinate values each.
This code creates a new ``dataset`` 'merged_ds' by merging the two arrays 'arr1' and 'arr2'.
The ``merge()`` function allows you to combine multiple ``DataArray`` or ``Dataset`` objects into a single ``Dataset``

> along one or more shared dimensions. If the input objects have different values for the same coordinate,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the input objects have different values for the same coordinate,
```

``merge()`` will create a new coordinate with the union of the values from the input objects.

Concatenating

>     Concatenating is used to combine two or more Datasets or DataArrays along a new dimension. When concatenating,

Reviewer 2: Maybe use "arrange"? or "rearrange" instead of "combine" here? The problem is the meaning of combine in this sentence is different to the meaning in the definition of "combining" further down.

>     Concatenating is used to combine two or more Datasets or DataArrays along a new dimension. When concatenating,

Reviewer 2: Concatenation can also be along an existing dimension, it doesn't have to be along a new dimension.

>     xarray stacks the datasets or dataarrays along a new dimension, and the resulting ``Dataset`` or ``Dataarray``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    xarray stacks the datasets or dataarrays along an existing or a new dimension, and the resulting ``Dataset`` or ``Dataarray``
```

>     xarray stacks the datasets or dataarrays along a new dimension, and the resulting ``Dataset`` or ``Dataarray``

Reviewer 2: "stack" also refers to something specific within xarray (see the `.stack` method). Again maybe use "arrange" or rearrange instead?

    will have the same variables and coordinates along the other dimensions.

.. ipython:: python

    a = xr.DataArray([[1, 2], [3, 4]], dims=("x", "y"))
    b = xr.DataArray([[5, 6], [7, 8]], dims=("x", "y"))

>     c = xr.concat([a, b], dim="c")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # concat along a new dimension
    c = xr.concat([a, b], dim="c")
    print(c)
    
    # concat along an existing dimension
    d = xr.concat([a, b], dim="x")
    print(d)
```

    print(c)

> This code creates two 2D arrays 'a' and 'b'. Both arrays have two dimensions "x" and "y", and contain the numbers 1 to 4

Reviewer: Adopt to the proposed code changes

and 5 to 8, respectively.
This code concatenates the two arrays 'a' and 'b' along a new dimension "c" using the ``xr.concat()`` function. The resulting
array 'c' has three dimensions "c", "x", and "y", and contains the numbers 1 to 8 arranged in two 2D arrays.

Combining
    Combining in xarray is a general term used to describe the process of combining two or more DataArrays or Datasets

>     into a single ``DataArray`` or ``Dataset``. This can include both merging and concatenating, as well as other operations
>     like arithmetic operations (e.g., adding two arrays together) or stacking (e.g., stacking two arrays along a new
>     dimension).

Reviewer 2: Combine in xarray has a more specific meaning:

```suggestion
    into a single ``DataArray`` or ``Dataset`` using some combination of merging and concatenation operations.
```

.. ipython:: python

    # create the first dataset
    ds1 = xr.Dataset(
        {"data": xr.DataArray([[1, 2], [3, 4]], dims=("x", "y"))},
        coords={"x": [1, 2], "y": [3, 4]},
    )

    # create the second dataset
    ds2 = xr.Dataset(
        {"data": xr.DataArray([[5, 6], [7, 8]], dims=("x", "y"))},
        coords={"x": [2, 3], "y": [4, 5]},
    )

    # combine the datasets
    combined_ds = xr.combine_by_coords([ds1, ds2])

    # print the combined dataset
    print(combined_ds)

This code creates two datasets, ds1 and ds2, each containing a 2D array of data with dimensions 'x' and 'y' and

> corresponding coordinate arrays. The datasets have overlapping coordinates on dimension 'x', with values [1, 2] in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
corresponding coordinate arrays. The datasets have overlapping coordinates on dimension ``'x'``, with values ``[1, 2]`` in
```

ds1 and [2, 3] in ds2, but no overlapping coordinates on dimension 'y'.

> The ``xr.combine_by_coords`` function is then used to combine the datasets by their coordinates. This function combines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :py:func:`xr.combine_by_coords` function is then used to combine the datasets by their coordinates. This function combines
```

> datasets with non-overlapping dimensions and concatenates arrays along overlapping dimensions. In this case, it will

Reviewer 2: What's going on in this example is simpler - just an automatic concatenation.

        ``__array_ufunc__`` and ``__array_function__`` protocols are also required.

        __ https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0022-ndarray-duck-typing-overview.html

    Aligning

        Aligning refers to the process of making sure that the dimensions
        and coordinates of two or more DataArrays or Datasets are consistent with each
        other so that they can be combined or compared properly.

> 

Reviewer: I think this should mention that missing values after alignment are filled with np.nan.

        For example, if you have two DataArrays that represent temperature measurements at
        different times, but one has a time coordinate in seconds and the other has a time
        coordinate in hours, you would need to align the two arrays by converting the time
        coordinate in one of the arrays to match the other array. Once the arrays are aligned,
        you can perform operations on them that require matching dimensions or coordinates,
        such as taking the difference between the two arrays or calculating the mean across time.

> 

Reviewer: This could certainly benefit from an example. Maybe sticking to the time example given in the text or a simple integer index?

    Broadcasting

        Broadcasting is a technique that allows operations to be performed on arrays
        with different shapes and dimensions. When performing operations on arrays with different
        shapes and dimensions, xarray will automatically broadcast the arrays to a common shape
        before the operation is applied.

        For example, if you have two arrays with different shapes, xarray will try to match the
        dimensions of the arrays and add new dimensions as necessary. This allows for easy element-wise
        operations on arrays that might otherwise have incompatible shapes.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we could add an example. Something like
```
a = DataArray([1, 2, 3], dims="x")
b = DataArray([4, 5], dims="y")
aa, bb = broadcast(a, b)
print(aa)
print(bb)
```

    Merging

        Merging refers to the process of combining multiple DataArrays or Dataset objects
        along one or more dimensions to create a new Dataset.

        The merge() function allows you to combine multiple DataArrays or Dataset objects into a
        single ``Dataset`` along one or more shared dimensions. If the input objects have different values for
        the same coordinate, merge() will create a new coordinate with the union of the values from the input objects.

        Suppose you have two datasets, both containing temperature data from different weather
        stations over the same time period. You want to combine these two datasets into a single dataset.
        Assuming that both datasets have the same coordinates (time, latitude, and longitude), you can merge
        them using merge() function.

> 

Reviewer: To find a simple example here will be difficult. Either it is just a simple combining two DataArrays into a dataset or it will mix with alignment. But maybe we can think of something.

    Concatenating

        Concatenating refers to the process of combining two or more arrays along a given dimension
        to create a new array. The resulting array has the same shape as the input arrays, except for the dimension
        along which the concatenation was performed, which is expanded to include the data from all input arrays.

        Concatenation is commonly used when working with multi-dimensional arrays that represent data over time or space.
        For example, if you have daily temperature data for multiple years, you can concatenate the arrays along the time
        dimension to create a single array with all the data.

> 

Reviewer: Again a small example could be nice here.
Something like this:
```
a = DataArray([1, 2, 3], dims="x")
print(concatenate([a, a], dim="x"))
print(concatenate ([a, a], dim="y"))

```

        xarray arranges the datasets or dataarrays along a new dimension, and the resulting ``Dataset`` or ``Dataarray``
        will have the same variables and coordinates along the other dimensions.

        .. ipython:: python

            a = xr.DataArray([[1, 2], [3, 4]], dims=("x", "y"))
            b = xr.DataArray([[5, 6], [7, 8]], dims=("x", "y"))
            c = xr.concat([a, b], dim="c")
            c

    Combining
        Combining in xarray is a general term used to describe the process of arranging two or more DataArrays or Datasets
        into a single ``DataArray`` or ``Dataset`` using some combination of merging and concatenation operations.

        .. ipython:: python

            ds1 = xr.Dataset(
                {"data": xr.DataArray([[1, 2], [3, 4]], dims=("x", "y"))},
                coords={"x": [1, 2], "y": [3, 4]},
            )
            ds2 = xr.Dataset(
                {"data": xr.DataArray([[5, 6], [7, 8]], dims=("x", "y"))},
                coords={"x": [2, 3], "y": [4, 5]},
            )

            # combine the datasets
            combined_ds = xr.combine_by_coords([ds1, ds2])
            combined_ds

    lazy

>         When working with xarray, you often deal with big sets of data. Instead of doing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        When working with xarray, you often deal with big sets of data. Instead of doing
```
```suggestion

```

I don't think this sentence adds much

        calculations right away, xarray lets you plan what calculations you want to do, like finding the
        average temperature in a dataset.This planning is called "lazy evaluation." Later, when
        you're ready to see the final result, you tell xarray, "Okay, go ahead and do those calculations now!"
        That's when xarray starts working through the steps you planned and gives you the answer you wanted.This
        lazy approach helps save time and memory because xarray only does the work when you actually need the

>         results.

Reviewer 2: Lazy evaluation is provided alternately by dask or by hidden xarray internals, depending on whether dask is installed. I'm wondering whether it's worth mentioning that here or not. @headtr1ck what do you think? I've added it to https://github.com/pydata/xarray/pull/7991 so we could link to that page?

Reviewer 2: I think we can leave this clarification for later.

    labeled

>         labeled refers to the way data is named with meaningful labels or coordinates.Instead of just having

Reviewer 2: You don't have to follow this, I'm just trying to structure it as
1) What is labelled data
2) What constitutes the labels
3) Why is that useful

        numerical indices to locate values, xarray allows you to attach labels to each dimension. These labels
        provide context and meaning to the data, making it easier to understand and work with. If you have
        temperature data for different cities over time. Using xarray, you can label the dimensions: one for
        cities and another for time.

    serialization
        Serialization is like putting your collection of data into a format that makes it easy to save and share.

>         When you serialize data in xarray, you're taking all those temperature measurements, along with their

Reviewer 2: Add something like "xarray objects can be serialized into formats which store the labels alongside the data"

"Some supported serialization formats are files that can then be stored or transferred (e.g. netCDF), whilst others are protocols that allow for data access over a network (e.g. Zarr)."

        labels and other information, and turning them into a format that can be stored in a file or sent over
        the internet.

    indexing

>         Indexing is way to quickly find and grab the specific pieces of data you're interested in from your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Indexing is how you select subsets of your data which you are interested in.
```

        dataset.

>         Label-based Indexing: You can use labels to specify what you want like "Give me the temperature for New York on July 15th."

Reviewer 2: If you can't make this a bulleted list you could bold the titles

```suggestion
        **Label-based Indexing:** You can use labels to specify what you want like "Give me the temperature for New York on July 15th."
```

>         Label-based Indexing: You can use labels to specify what you want like "Give me the temperature for New York on July 15th."

Reviewer 2: Rewrite this to explain that label-based indexing is selection by passing a label and comparing to the labels stored in the coordinates

>         Indexing is how you select subsets of your data which you are interested in.

Reviewer 2: Check if this link works once it builds

```suggestion
        :ref:`Indexing` is how you select subsets of your data which you are interested in.
```

>         dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

        Positional Indexing: You can use numbers to refer to positions in the data like "Give me the third temperature in the list." This is useful when you know the order of your data but don't need to remember the exact labels.

>         Slicing: You can take a "slice" of your data, like you might want all temperatures from July 1st to July 10th.

Reviewer 2: Important to note here that xarray supports slicing for both positional and label-based indexing

>         Boolean Indexing: You can use true/false statements to filter your data. It's like saying "Show me temperatures where it was above 80 degrees."

Reviewer 2: Maybe distinguish between indexing with a boolean array, and the statement/condition that creates the boolean array to begin with (e.g. an inequality like `temp > 80`).

        ``__array_ufunc__`` and ``__array_function__`` protocols are also required.

        __ https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0022-ndarray-duck-typing-overview.html

        .. ipython:: python
            :suppress:

            import numpy as np
            import xarray as xr

    Aligning
        Aligning refers to the process of ensuring that two or more DataArrays or Datasets
        have the same dimensions and coordinates, so that they can be combined or compared properly.

        .. ipython:: python

            x = xr.DataArray(
                [[25, 35], [10, 24]],
                dims=("lat", "lon"),
                coords={"lat": [35.0, 40.0], "lon": [100.0, 120.0]},
            )
            y = xr.DataArray(
                [[20, 5], [7, 13]],
                dims=("lat", "lon"),
                coords={"lat": [35.0, 42.0], "lon": [100.0, 120.0]},
            )
            x
            y

    Broadcasting
        A technique that allows operations to be performed on arrays with different shapes and dimensions.

>         When performing operations on arrays with different shapes and dimensions, xarray will automatically broadcast the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        When performing operations on arrays with different shapes and dimensions, xarray will automatically attempt to broadcast the
```

        lazy approach helps save time and memory because xarray only does the work when you actually need the
        results.

    labeled
        Labeled data has metadata describing the context of the data, not just the raw data values.
        These can be tick labels (stored as Coordinates) or unique names for each array. labels are
        constituted by two main components: coordinates and attributes. These labels
        provide context and meaning to the data, making it easier to understand and work with. If you have
        temperature data for different cities over time. Using xarray, you can label the dimensions: one for
        cities and another for time.

    serialization
        Serialization is the process of converting your data into a format that makes it easy to save and share.
        When you serialize data in xarray, you're taking all those temperature measurements, along with their
        labels and other information, and turning them into a format that can be stored in a file or sent over
        the internet. xarray objects can be serialized into formats which store the labels alongside the data.

>         "Some supported serialization formats are files that can then be stored or transferred (e.g. netCDF),
>         whilst others are protocols that allow for data access over a network (e.g. Zarr)."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Some supported serialization formats are files that can then be stored or transferred (e.g. netCDF),
        whilst others are protocols that allow for data access over a network (e.g. Zarr).
```

        ``__array_ufunc__`` and ``__array_function__`` protocols are also required.

        __ https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0022-ndarray-duck-typing-overview.html

.. ipython:: python
    :suppress:

    import xarray as xr
    import numpy as np

Aligning
    Aligning refers to the process of ensuring that two or more DataArrays or Datasets
    have the same dimensions and coordinates, so that they can be combined or compared properly.

.. ipython:: python

    # Two DataArrays with different time coordinates

>     time1 = np.arange("2022-01-01", "2022-01-06", dtype="datetime64")
>     time2 = np.arange("2022-01-03", "2022-01-08", dtype="datetime64")

Reviewer 2: To avoid a warning about nanosecond precision datetimes here (which is causing the docs build to fail) I think you need to add `[ns]`, see examples from [docs on using times and dates in xarray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/user-guide/time-series.html#creating-datetime64-data).

```suggestion
    time1 = np.arange("2022-01-01", "2022-01-06", dtype="datetime64[ns]")
    time2 = np.arange("2022-01-03", "2022-01-08", dtype="datetime64[ns]")
```
